
--- Page 1 ---
Expt. No.:         Date:  
 
REGULATION OF ALTERNATOR BY ZPF METHOD 
 
AIM: 
 
To predetermine the voltage regulation of an alternator by ZPF or Potier method. 
 
APPARATUS REQUIRED: 
 
Serial No. Item Type and Range Quantity  
 Voltmeter 
Ammeter 
Wattmeter 
Rheostat 
Tachometer 
DPDT 
TPST 
Lamps(Synchronising) 
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
OPEN CIRCUIT TEST 
1. Wire up the circuit as per the OCC determination test. 
2. Set the field rheostat of the motor to minimum resistance and that of the alternator 
to maximum resistance position. 
3. The rheostats in the armature circuit of the motor are set for maximum resistance 
position. 
4. The TPST switch is kept open, and the DC motor is started using 3-point starter. 
5. Using the armature rheostats of the motor, the alternator is driven at rated speed if 
not achieved, the resistance in the field rheostat is included. 
6. Keeping the SPST open and ensuring zero field current in the alternator side, the 
residual voltage is noted down. Then the SPST is closed. 
7. Adjust the field current of the alternator in steps and corresponding to each field 
current, record the terminal voltage on open circuit. 
8. The experiment is repeated until about 120% of the rated voltage is obtained. 
Throughout the experiment, the speed must be maintained at the rated speed 
value. 
9. Plot the phase value of open circuit voltage against field current to obtain the open 
circuit characteristic curve. 
 
 
--- Page 2 ---
To obtain ZPF point and Potier triangle: 
 
1. Make connections as shown in the circuit diagram for connection alternator to infinite 
busbar..  
2. Keep the armature rheostat of the DC machine in maximum resistance position and the 
field rheostat in minimum resistance position. Also, keep the field rheostat of the 
alternator in maximum resistance position. All the switches are kept open.  
3. Switch on the DC supply and start the motor using 3-point starter.  
4. Bring the speed of the DC motor very close to synchronous speed by adjusting the 
armature rheostat and the field rheostat of the motor.  
5. Put on the AC supply  
6. Watch the changes in the glow of three lamp sets. If the phase sequence is correct, all 
three lamp sets come to a fully bright position simultaneously at one instant and then 
slowly go to the dark side simultaneously at the same instant and the cycle repeats. 
7. If the phase sequence is incorrect, then the lamps brighten up in a cyclic order, one after 
the other. In that case, switch off the whole supply, interchange any two leads of the 
alternator or the supply mains, and restart.  
8. Measure its line-line voltage. Adjust the field current of the alternator so that its generated 
voltage is equal to the AC supply voltage.  
9. For frequency synchronization, small adjustments in the speed of the motor must be made 
to get longer dark periods.  
8. If all conditions are verified, then in the middle of the dark period synchronizing 
switch TPST is closed, thereby connecting the alternator with the infinite bus.  
9. Increase the speed of the DC motor so that the wattmeter reads one-third of the 
required output as the wattmeter is reading per phase value. This reading must be 
kept constant throughout the experiment.  
10. Adjust the field current of the alternator for a minimum value so that the current 
delivered by the alternator is equal to its rated current. Adjust the field rheostat of 
motor to bring the power output of the alternator to zero. Note down the readings of 
all meters.  
11. Reduce the armature current to a minimum and switch off AC supply and then the 
DC supply.  
12. Plot the OCC and the ZPF point on a graph with common field current taken in X-axis. 
13. Complete the Potier triangle and determine the IX L drop and field current If1 required to 
overcome armature reaction drop from the triangle. 
14. Find E using the formula E= 22 )sin(IR)  cos( sIXVV    (+ for lagging and - for 
leading power factors. 
15. Find the field current If2 corresponding to E from OCC graph. 
--- Page 3 ---
16. Find the resultant field current using If1 and If2 using the formula 
If = ට(𝐼௙ଵ
ଶ + 𝐼௙ଶ
ଶ − 2𝐼௙ଵ𝐼௙ଶ 𝑐𝑜𝑠( 90 ±𝜑))    
(+ for lagging and – for leading power factors) 
17. From OCC find the voltage Eo corresponding to If from the above equation. 
18. Find the regulation using the formula V
VEo   x 100% 
 
  
 
 
  
--- Page 4 ---
Circuit Diagram for OCC: 
 

--- Page 5 ---
Circuit Diagram for ZPF point determination: 
 
  

--- Page 6 ---
Tabular Observation: 
OCC: 
Serial no. Field Current I f 
amp 
Open circuit line 
voltage Eo (line)V 
Open circuit 
phase voltage Eoph 
V 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
ZPF point: 
Field Current If  A Short circuit current Isc A 
  
 
Regulation Pre-determination: 
S 
NO. 
Nature of 
pf 
PF Rated Voltage/Phase V 
Volt 
E 
Volts 
If 
A 
Generated 
volt/Phase Eo 
volt 
%REG=(Eo-V)/V)*100 
1. 0.0     
2. 0.2     
3. 0.4     
4. 0.6     
5. 0.8     
6. 1.0     
7. 0.8     
8. 0.6     
9. 0.4     
10. 0.2     
11. 0.0     
--- Page 7 ---
Model Graph: 
 
• Draw MN Equal and parallel to OL 
• Thru N draw a line parallel to airgap line meeting OCC at P 
• Drop a perpendicular to Q  on MN from P 
• ΔPMN is Potier Triangle 
• PQ represents IXL drop 
• MQ is field current required to overcome armature reaction drop 
  

--- Page 8 ---
Phasor diagram: 
• Draw rated VPh vector, represent current I at ɸ pf angle 
• Draw IRa parallel to I vector and represent IXL obtained from Potier Δ perpendicular to 
IRa.  
• Find E – vectorial sum of VPh, IRa and IXL 
• Draw OF perpendicular to E which is field current corresponding to E from OCC graph 
• Draw FG = QM from Potier Δ at an angle (90±ɸ)  ‘+’ for lagging pf and ‘–’ for leading 
pf 
• Find OG which is the field excitation If corresponding to Eo in OCC graph. Find Eo. 
 
%100% xV
VEreg o 
 
Result: 
The voltage regulation of three phase alternator was predetermined using ZPF or Potier method 
at different power factor conditions and the ZPG regulation phasor diagram is drawn for a given 
power factor. 
 
Inference:  
IXL 
90+ɸ 