
--- Page 1 ---
Expt. No.:         Date:  
 
ALTERNATOR ON INFINITE BUS BAR 
 
AIM: 
 
To plot the “V” and inverted “V” curves of the given alternator connected to infinite bus bar at 
constant output. 
 
APPARATUS REQUIRED: 
 
Serial No. Item Type and Range Quantity  
 Voltmeter 
Ammeter 
Wattmeter 
Rheostat 
Tachometer 
DPDT 
TPST 
Lamps(Synchronising) 
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
PROCEDURE: 
 
Synchronization and V and inverted V-curves of the alternator 
 
10. Make connections as shown in the circuit diagram.  
11. Keep the armature rheostat of the DC machine in maximum resistance position and the 
field rheostat in minimum resistance position. Also, keep the field rheostat of the 
alternator in maximum resistance position. All the switches are kept open.  
12. Switch on the DC supply and start the motor using 3-point starter.  
13. Bring the speed of the DC motor very close to synchronous speed by adjusting the 
armature rheostat and the field rheostat of the motor.  
14. Put on the AC supply  
15. Watch the changes in the glow of three lamp sets. If the phase sequence is correct, all 
three lamp sets come to a fully bright position simultaneously at one instant and then 
slowly go to the dark side simultaneously at the same instant and the cycle repeats. 
16. If the phase sequence is incorrect,then the lamps brighten up in a cyclic order, one after 
the other. In that case, switch off the whole supply, interchange any two leads of the 
alternator or the supply mains, and restart.  
--- Page 2 ---
17. Measure its line-line voltage. Adjust the field current of the alternator so that its generated 
voltage is equal to the AC supply voltage.  
18. For frequency synchronization, small adjustments in the speed of the motor must be made 
to get longer dark periods.  
19. If all conditions are verified, then in the middle of the dark period synchronizing 
switch TPST is closed, thereby connecting the alternator with the infinite bus.  
20. Increase the speed of the DC motor so that the wattmeter reads one-third of the 
required output as the wattmeter is reading per phase value. This reading must be 
kept constant throughout the experiment.  
21. Adjust the field current of the alternator for a minimum value so that the current 
delivered by the alternator is nearly equal to the rated current. Note down the readings 
of all meters.  
22. Increase the alternator field current in equal steps, and for each step, note down the 
meter readings and tabulate the values. See that the armature current never exceeds 
the rated current.  
23. Reduce the armature current to a minimum and switch off AC supply and then the 
DC supply.  
24. Draw the ‘V’ and inverted ‘V’ curves using the tabulated values.  
 
SAMPLE CALCULATION:-  
IL= 
 
VL= 
 
Total three phase power W= Wattmeter reading x 3 x multiplication factor of the meter 
 
Power factor=W / (√3 * VL* IL) 
 
  
--- Page 3 ---
CIRCUIT DIAGRAM: 
 
  

--- Page 4 ---
Tabulation:  
    Wattmeter multiplication factor= 
Serial No 
Voltage 
VL 
(V) 
Line 
Current 
IL (A) 
Field  
Current 
If (A) Wattmeter(W) 
Power 
Factor 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
 
Model Graph: 
 
RESULT: 
 
The Alternator was synchronised to the three phase infinite busbar and its V and inverted V 
curves were plotted at constant power output. 
 
INFERENCE: 
